[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My journey started
when I was a kid.
My dad was a dentist.
And his brother and sister
were both medical doctors.
He was interested in
the work of Adelle Davis
and also the work
of Weston Price.
And on his bedside table
was Weston Price's book
showing how the dentition
of indigenous cultures
changed within one generation
of introducing refined foods.
So I grew up on cereal
that we called birdseed.
And my parents spiked the
orange juice with vitamin C.
And there's another interesting
thing that my dad did.
And when he had his patients on
antibiotics for oral surgery,
he would have my
mother make yogurt.
This was years before Yoplait.
Before any commercial yogurt
was available, she'd make it.
He'd take it down the
street and give it
to his patients who were
on antibiotics to replenish
their gut flora.
We had a compost heap.
We raised organic beef cattle.
And so I grew up with
this kind of sensibility.
However, I had a
sister who died.
She wouldn't eat.
And she died at six months.
My mother had been on high doses
of an antibiotic for pneumonia
during her pregnancy.
And it was before we
understood that antibiotics
have side effects.
And so she died.
They never really
knew the cause.
And when my brother Bill was
born, he also wouldn't eat.
And eventually, my
parents signed him out
of the hospital
against medical advice.
I was about eight years old.
They tube fed him
at home every hour
on the hour with an NG
tube-- nasogastric tube.
And at a year, he
weighed 10 pounds.
My parents signed him
out of the hospital
against medical advice.
When I was interviewing
for med school,
my dad was taken to the
hospital to the intensive care
unit with chest pain.
And he also, after three
days, called my mother.
He said, Edna, get
me out of here.
They don't know what's going on.
And he signed out AMA--
against medical advice
and recovered at home.
He did not have a heart attack.
He had pericarditis.
It was misdiagnosed.
And he recovered
sitting up in a chair.
I was interviewing
for med school.
My brother Bill who
weighed 10 pounds at a year
is now 50 years old,
perfectly healthy.
And if my parents had not signed
him out, he would be dead.
So you see, I grew up with
the influence of organic food
and living close to the Earth,
but having an aunt and uncle
who were medical doctors and
knowing the value of that,
but a father who understood
the natural world.
And all of it came together
for me in my career.
So no one has all
of the answers,
but we really have to get back
to a more natural approach.
And I grew up with that.
I have a first chakra
that's so hugely grounded.
Our first chakra is our
sense of safety and security
in the world, our
sense of belonging.
And my first chakra,
belonging, was always
a bit against the mainstream.
And therefore, I
didn't have to worry
that I would be loved by my
family for doing the work
that I do.
Most people who have been
outside the mainstream
have to be very
worried that they
will lose their social
support network, which
helps wire in immunity.
Community equals immunity.
And so we need the
collective to go along
with us, at least
to some extent,
otherwise we're out there like
the only member of a tribe.
And you starve to death
when you're off by yourself.
It takes a lot of courage
to go up against any system
or suggest a different way.
And the only reason
I've been able to do it
is the conviction of my
parents, and the fact
that this sense of purpose, and
that the rightness of what I'm
doing was wired in very young.
The obesity epidemic-- you
could actually trace back,
I think, to the day that
SnackWell's cookies came out.
And they began to replace
dietary fat with sugar.
And that's when the obesity
epidemic really started.
And we began to vilify
saturated animal fat
and start to think that huge
low-fat muffins were the way
to go.
And as a result,
everyone has become
fatter and fatter and fatter.
If you go through
the airport, what
are the foods that you see?
You see Cinnabon, and giant
pretzels, and all the foods
that you crave when
you're under stress.
When you're under stress,
you have the stress hormones
cortisol and epinephrine.
And if you've ever seen
anyone on steroid medication
such as prednisone, you see that
the first thing that happens
is they gain 20 to 30 pounds,
no matter what they're eating.
In fact, when your
cortisol stress
hormone levels are
high enough, they've
documented the fact
that looking at a donut
actually changes
your metabolism.
And so here we are now
as an entire culture,
swimming in a sea
of stress hormones
and also sugar, which is
the response to stress.
If you think about it, our
central nervous systems
really haven't changed
for thousands of years
from millennia.
And we are made
so that if you see
something that is dangerous,
you run away from it.
So you get this bump from
your adrenals of cortisol
that should last about
15 minutes of running.
And then you eat to make
up for the energy expended.
Now, every time
you watch the news,
there's something
to run away from.
Because we also have a
global information system
that is designed to take all
the bad news from the planet
and bring it into your
living room constantly.
Or now with the internet,
constantly on your computer.
So if you do not have a way
to put this in perspective,
you're in a constant
state of fight or flight
and then a constant
state of sugar craving
to make you feel better.
Because what sugar
does is it increases
beta endorphin in the brain.
And that's a feel-good
natural opiate,
morphine-like substance.
And so when you're depressed
or you're under stress,
you want to eat.
What do we call them?
"Comfort foods--" macaroni
and cheese, all the foods that
have a virtual delivery system
of sugar right into body fat.
So it is not fat
that makes you fat.
It's sugar that makes you fat.
And it is very easy and
cheap to produce foods
that become sugar quickly.
Most grains become
sugar quickly,
particularly refined
grains, refined pasta,
this sort of thing.
And in the United
States, we have now
produced very high gluten wheat,
which is a whole other problem.
Because the body wasn't designed
to eat this much high gluten,
big fluffy bagels.
You'll notice when you see
old movies that the portion
size is very small.
Or when you go to Europe
to a very high-end place,
you'll have a seven-course meal.
And in those seven
courses, you probably
do not eat as much volume as
you get in the United States
with your dinner plate.
They're beautifully
done small portions,
digesting in
between the courses,
a meal as a celebration.
Whereas in many countries
with fast food now,
a meal is something
you eat in your car
while your stress
hormones are up here.
So there's never this
sense of satisfaction--
I've been fed.
And then, of course,
we're raising our children
on baby formula, which has
sugar added to it and not breast
milk, which is the
normal food for babies.
So there's all these things
that contribute to it.
There is an old saying.
Candy is dandy, but
liquor is quicker.
And what we're really talking
about is getting that hit,
getting that sugar high,
getting that beta endorphin rush
that people are looking
for to soothe themselves
when they are under stress.
There is an interesting
study called
the ACE study, the Adverse
Childhood Experiences study,
done by Vincent Felitti at
Kaiser Permanente in San Diego.
And they were working
with obese people.
And what he's come
to the conclusion of
is that obesity is
not the problem.
It's a solution.
So let's take a look at that.
It's a solution
to chronic stress.
It's a solution in many
people to sexual abuse,
dysfunctional family
situation, and so on.
Now, that's an underlying truth.
But now, with the lifestyle
of the average American,
it's almost like we're
all chronically stressed.
So we are going
for the foods that
give us a temporary
respite from feeling bad.
So if you watch a sitcom like
the "Golden Girls," you'll
see that Blanche--
and they all sit
down at night when
they're talking about
men problems or problems
with their kids.
And they sit down
around a cheesecake,
or they sit down
around ice cream.
And you'll see this played out
in television all the time.
But once you understand
that sugar is a drug
just like alcohol is a drug.
And so what happens with
any addiction is this.
You become habituated
to the effect.
And therefore, you need
more and more and more over
time to give you
the same effect.
It's no different
than it is with sugar.
Now, if you walk the aisles
in the average grocery store
and you look at the amount of
sugar in a child's breakfast
cereal, you might as well be
rolling up the kid's sleeve
and putting in heroin,
because it's the same.
It's that addictive.
Now, we think about,
whoo, cocaine, heroin,
all these big drugs.
But the truth is
that premature death
is coming from sugar and
alcohol and smoking, of course.
So if you begin to think about
these massive doses of sugar
as no different from
drugs and alcohol,
then you get a handle
on the situation.
Now, here's what
happens, though.
When you withdraw from
sugar, you instantly
feel a little bit depressed.
But over time,
when you've learned
to balance that with protein and
fat and keep the carbohydrates,
the sugar at a lower
glycemic index, meaning
that the sugar is released
into the bloodstream
much more slowly,
then what happens
is that awful, insatiable
sugar craving finally goes away
and you get off
the roller coaster.
Back in the '80s, I was a
pretty vegan macrobiotic, which
makes you feel quite holy.
And it makes you feel devoted.
However, the tendency in
many, many vegetarians
is to eat too much grain.
And then what happens
because grain is associated
with high blood sugar,
you say to yourself,
well, a donut is
vegan, which is true.
It can be made vegan.
And then you got
these big cookies.
And what you find often
is vegetarians are often
very addicted to sugar.
And in the macrobiotic community
in Boston at that time,
there was almost this joke
within the community, which
is that people would do
drive-through Dunkin'
Donuts under cover of
darkness, so that no one would
see this addictive behavior.
Now, what I noticed
is the minute I began
to add more protein and
healthy fat to my diet
and cut way back on the grains,
this insatiable sugar craving
went away.
And it started with breakfast.
So you have to nail in your
blood sugar at breakfast.
Because what you don't
eat in the morning
or what you do
sets up your blood sugar
for the next 12 hours.
And so when you
don't have breakfast,
and you have a cup of coffee
and then a bagel or donut,
and then you don't eat lunch,
because you're too rushed,
what happens is your blood sugar
at 4 o'clock in the afternoon
begins to plummet.
And then you begin your evening
meal at the refrigerator.
And the evening meal
doesn't end until midnight
when you crash into bed and
begin the cycle all over again.
When you start your
day with some protein,
you can have a little bit of
low-glycemic carbohydrate.
With protein, you will
find that you're not
getting that incredible crash
at 4 o'clock in the afternoon.
So you really begin
to feel as though you
have control over your destiny.
It's a very different
biochemistry in your brain.
So I'd like people to
know it's not your fault.
This is how we are as mammals.
I mean, we've lived on
the Earth for millennium
where there was a food shortage.
You're programmed to
put on fat whenever
there is food available.
But now, there's a
lot of food available,
but it's the wrong kind.
And so we've been
programmed for millennia
to store up for the winter,
but the winter doesn't come.
There's an interesting
addiction that I've
seen through the years,
and it's to diet colas.
Nothing else does it in your
brain quite like a diet cola.
And Diet 7UP doesn't do it.
Diet Sprite doesn't do it.
It's Diet Coke.
And that's because there's
a deadly combination there
of aspartame and caffeine.
And those two together
create a very unique blend
of excitotoxin that
kills off brain cells.
But before they die,
they have this excitement
that's like a buzz.
So what you find
with the Diet Coke
addicts is that
they'll drink sometimes
a liter, 2 liters a day.
And particularly
women do it as a way
to keep their weight down.
They don't eat.
They just have the next
buzz of diet colas.
But the problem
is, over time, this
can lead to symptoms that
mimic multiple sclerosis.
There's headaches.
There's neurologic problems.
There's all kinds of problems.
There are now diet
drinks with stevia.
Zevia is a brand name.
And that's very nice.
There's zero water,
and that works.
And I'm really kind of happy the
way industry has moved forward
to give us alternatives
that are healthy.
With Diet Coke,
you can get off it.
It's three days.
So if you want to get
off it, it's 72 hours.
Drink chamomile tea,
drink lots of water.
And you'll find that if
you drink lots of water
throughout the
day, the addiction
is gone after three days.
But then stay away from
it, because there's
a certain group of individuals.
It's not everybody that will
get addicted to Diet Coke.
I'm not.
I can have one
every three months.
No problem.
But if you're addicted--
so take the first one.
And then you want the next
one, and the next one,
and the next one.
Very specific brain type.
And never give
these to children.
Never.
In general, when you start to
look at artificial sweeteners,
we find that people
do better when
they're on natural sweeteners.
But again, sugar
is sugar is sugar.
So there's honey.
And there's maple syrup.
And there's barley
malt and agave.
And all of them still
are fairly high glycemic.
Agave-- depends on
where it's from.
But most of them are still
sugar and still addictive.
So for that sweet taste, what
I found is the absolute best.
Because it's not
addictive, is stevia.
And the herb stevia has been
used for hundreds of years.
It is now available in sodas.
They're putting it
in drinks and so on.
When you are off the sugar
roller coaster, you're human.
You're still going to want
a sweet taste now and again.
And fresh fruit, of
course, is perfect,
because it's low glycemic
in almost every case.
But for that
occasional diet drink,
get one sweetened
with stevia or one
of my favorites, which is
just a nice cup of coffee
with a little stevia and a
little heavy cream sweetened
with stevia.
It makes almost a
dessert-like ending to a meal,
so that I don't feel deprived.
Over time, what you'll find
is that huge sweet tooth where
you have to have whatever it
is, you don't care anymore.
I'm sitting here talking to you.
And I actually can't even
believe that I'm saying that.
Because for years, even
starting as a little kid,
I very much liked sugar.
Even in our "organically
grown" childhood,
we liked pies and cakes.
And I remember experimenting
with trying to make everything
with whole wheat flour, wheat
germ brownies, all that stuff.
It was still sugar.
The number one best way
to digest stress hormones
is sleep.
And deep sleep will
metabolize excess cortisol
and epinephrine better
than anything else.
Now, I want people
to try something.
If you've been
under stress and you
sleep for only three
to four hours a night,
you will gain two pounds
just from that alone.
Because the stress
increases fluid retention.
So I call those liquid pounds.
You want to take care
of those liquid pounds
before they turn into real
pounds, which they inevitably
will.
Many, many people are
sleep deprived now.
And we have been in the midst
of a sleep macho culture
where people actually brag
about how little sleep they
got in the culture of
medicine and surgery,
where you're doing
surgery in the morning.
You're up all night,
bringing people back
from the brink of death.
It's very sleep macho, and
it's completely unhealthy.
So I'd first like to give people
permission to sleep and sleep
as long as you need
to whenever you can.
So that's sleep.
The second thing that
really metabolizes
stress hormones-- and this is
how the body was designed--
is exercise.
When you lift weights or
you simply take a long walk,
you're doing a couple things.
One is you're increasing those
feel-good hormones that you've
normally gone to sugar for.
So exercise.
Taking a walk three,
four times a week
is as good as anti-depressants
for mild to moderate
depression.
I mean, this is insane.
You just exercise alone.
And you know when you get
out there and you do it.
And you're in the
fresh air and so on.
You feel much better.
And that's biochemical.
So meditation is
another one that
works extraordinarily well.
20 minutes of meditation
in the morning
or whenever you can
do it just sitting.
And you can use the Herb
Benson relaxation response
where you close your eyes.
And then the mantra is rose,
or the mantra is peace,
or the mantra is
whatever your mantra is.
And every time the mind
wanders, which it will,
because it's a monkey mind,
you come back to that.
And you just sit there.
And that will lower
blood pressure.
And it will increase beta
endorphins and so on.
Anything that is
sustainably pleasurable
will decrease stress hormones.
Laughter decreases
them enormously.
So I would recommend
that you have
some funny movies lying around.
"Tommy Boy" is a good one.
"Wedding Crashers," some of
the old Charlie Chaplin movies.
Anything like that.
And that's been clinically shown
to improve immunity and also
decrease pain.
This is the old Norman
Cousins' stuff from the past.
"Anatomy of an Illness as
Perceived by the Patient."
And sex is also very good.
The problem with sex is
in certain individuals,
it can become addictive.
So I'm not talking about
sex to fulfill a need,
but touching, massage
is very, very good.
I don't think there's anything
better than a good foot
reflexology treatment
to decrease stress.
I swear I can put anyone into a
trance with the way I do that.
So those are things that
you can do naturally.
I actually think that the
concept of loving yourself
is key to all of it.
Without that, nothing else
is going to be sustainable.
Because if you have a
message in your head--
I'm worthless, piece
of crap, and my life
doesn't count for anything,
and I'm always a failure,
and I screw up all the time,
and I'll never be good enough,
and I'll never make it,
and no one loves me.
If that's what's going
on subconsciously--
and by the way, that's
usually nailed in,
in childhood from some decision
you made based on something
that your parents said
or a sibling said.
I had a woman on my
radio show the other day
whose sister told her that
her husband probably had
an affair because of her neck.
Because of the way her neck
looked, because the skin
was looking a little old.
Now, this is a smart woman.
And yet, she keeps going
back to, is it my neck?
And I said, I assure
you it is not your neck.
However, we're all so
vulnerable to these feelings
that we have from childhood.
So the first thing
you do is you know
that they're probably there.
And Louise Hay of Hay House
has a wonderful practice.
And if anyone would just do
this, really do it for 30 days.
And for years, I wrote
it out on a prescription.
OK, so here it is.
I accept myself
unconditionally right now.
I write it on the prescription.
Their job was to post it
on their bathroom mirror
and twice a day look deep
into their eyes and say,
I accept myself
unconditionally right now.
Now, then you wait.
You wait for the
messages to arise.
You're a piece of shit.
There's no way you
can love yourself.
Look at your thighs.
You see all that cellulite?
What about that body of yours?
You're 30 pounds overweight.
You're unmarried.
You're a middle-aged
woman with cats.
There's nothing
acceptable about you.
That's what's going to come up.
That's OK.
If you do this for 30 days--
the PhD level, by the way,
is just gazing into your eyes
and saying, I love you.
I really love you.
By about day 28,
something shifts inside.
And you begin to believe
it, because you're
planting a new affirmation.
Rudyard Kipling said, I am
by nature a dealer in words.
And words are the most powerful
drug known to humanity.
So you are giving yourself
different messages.
And when you start to do
that, you begin to have--
you develop like a
muscle this witness self
that listens to you talk.
And the stronger that
witness self gets,
the healthier you get.
Because you're
not your thoughts,
and you're not that
programming from childhood.
You bring that to consciousness.
And then the other
practical thing
you do is you begin to
surround yourself with friends
who actually support you.
I can guarantee you the
biggest naysayers in your life
are probably family members.
We like to think, well,
my family loves me.
Yeah, they do.
But they also want to
keep you in the box,
particularly if you're a mother.
Nobody wants mom to
get out of the box,
because then, who's
going to cook and clean?
So one of the
things that happens
if you're a mother is your
children will make fun of you
whenever you start
to do anything
that is a little bit outside of
what they would like you to do.
I remember the first time I wore
a velour leopard giant shirt.
It's a giant shirt.
It's not sexy in any way.
It's just leopard.
And my daughter was 10.
Are you going to wear that, mom?
And so you have to--
and I've developed this
refined part of myself
that when my kids ask me,
are you going to do that?
Then I know I'm on
the right track.
Yeah, I'm going to do that.
And then I'm going to take
the dialogue of our family
to a higher level, instead of
keeping everyone in the box.
We have a saying in Maine.
Crabs in the bucket.
When one crab gets over the
edge and it's looking around,
things could be different here.
That looks good over there.
Maybe I'll learn to dance.
The other crabs
pull it back down.
So you have to note in your life
who's pulling you back down.
And eventually, you'll
find a new tribe
of people who will support you.
And this is a very good time
to do that on planet Earth.
Because the light
is getting lighter.
We are in this
documentary, aren't we now?
I have a good friend who
weighed 100 pounds more
than she does now.
Back when she was in
her teenage years,
her mother was schizophrenic.
And she said food was my friend.
Her dad was a career
officer in the war,
was always away from home.
So she raised her three
younger siblings as her mother
slowly went crazy.
And she said food was my friend.
And I knew I would lose
the weight when I finally
got away from home.
She introduced me to some
Living in Process therapies.
One was with Anne Wilson Schaef.
And I watched as people had
these old emotions come up.
And one woman got down
on a mat and started
to sob about something stuck
in her body in childhood.
And by the way, body
workers will often
find this when they're doing
a massage in a certain way.
An old memory will come up.
It's like they're
stored in the muscles.
And when you allow that
emotion to come out
totally-- like this woman cried
and cried and cried and cried.
And she got up.
And she weighed
five pounds less.
I've seen it over
and over and over.
Now, we know Einstein
said e equals mc squared.
Energy and matter
are interconvertible.
So when you release a big
load of blocked energy,
then the weight also
can dematerialize.
And it goes back doesn't it?
To self-love where you decide
you're going to love yourself
just the way you are
and at the same time,
eat breakfast, and
at the same time,
do more walking, and at
the same time, meditate,
but from a place of self-love.
On Valentine's Day this past
year, I sat in the bathtub
and decided I was going to
do my own Valentine's Day
ritual of self-love.
So I put some rose oil in there.
And I happened to have some
roses lying around-- pink.
Put the rose petals
in the bathtub,
put on some nice Deva
Premal chanting music,
and just sat in the bathtub and
reveled in a self-love ritual.
Easy to do.
Just use common household items.
And I had this sense
of creating a cocoon
of loving kindness for myself.
And it has stayed with me.
So if you can take
one little time
frame in which you felt
completely loved and completely
accepted and you can run
that by as a touchstone--
your central nervous system--
please know that the body makes
no--
there is no difference
between an imagined experience
and an actual experience.
The body can't tell.
So when you run this by in
a visualization or simply
remembering how that was, you
can create a biochemical state
in your body-mind.
I remember years ago listening
to Elisabeth Kubler-Ross who
was Swiss and one of triplets.
And she had a particularly
rough childhood.
And she said based on
her own experience--
and of course, she was
a psychiatrist, so based
on the experience of
millions of people
and the death and dying
people that she worked with.
She said we're raised to
be little prostitutes.
I'll love you if--
and therefore, just loving
yourself, accepting yourself
is not enough.
Because we think-- we
learn stupid things.
Don't break your arm patting
yourself on the back.
I mean, who are you
to love yourself?
But every kid born
likes themselves.
You ever see a two-year-old?
I mean, if you want to
see the human state,
look at a two-year-old
running around.
They really like themselves.
They move very well
in their bodies.
And when they begin to walk,
to do something new like walk,
they fall down a lot.
But we don't say to them
get up, you little toad.
Like, you want to
be able to walk.
Can't you do that better?
No.
They fall.
They get up.
They laugh.
They fall.
They cry.
They get up.
They laugh.
Because no one's
telling them they're
a stupid fool because
they can't walk yet.
But when you're human,
and you go to school,
and you do all
that, you're taught
that you're worthless unless
you're achieving this, this,
this, this, this.
And then at the
end of the day, you
realize there is no achievement.
There is no achievement
that's going
to do what self-love does.
People say to me
sometimes, well,
what must it be like to be
famous or to be a celebrity?
Or whatever it is.
And I say to them
celebrity is meaningless.
There's nothing there.
It's a myth.
Because at the end of
the day when you go home,
no one's there but
you, and maybe some
loved ones, and maybe your cat.
But if you don't like your life
and like you, there's no Oscar.
There is no "New York
Times" Best Seller.
There's no anything that will do
it for you more than self-love.
And physiologically as a
doctor, let me tell you
what self-love does.
It improves your
hearing, your eyesight.
It lowers your blood pressure.
It increases pulmonary
function, cardiac output.
It helps wire in
the musculature.
So if we had a rampant
epidemic of self-love,
then our health care costs
would go down dramatically.
So this isn't just some
little foo-foo New Age notion.
Oh, love yourself, honey.
This is hardcore science.
And the way you do
the self-love is you
find yourself
beating yourself up.
And this is my favorite
thing from Gay Hendricks.
How do you love yourself?
You love yourself for
not loving yourself.
Because when you start to learn
about the mind-body connection,
you do things like, oh, my God.
Oh, my God.
I did something wrong.
I have a fibroid tumor.
I've just been diagnosed
with breast cancer.
I've been reading Louise
Hay my whole life.
I've eaten well.
I got breast cancer.
Better get out the flail
and beat myself up.
No, the first thing you
do is you have compassion,
because we're not in control.
The culture is
bigger than we are.
And stuff happens to
us that is outside
of the control of the left
hemisphere, the part of us that
thinks it's driving the bus.
The heart and the soul
are driving the bus.
And they often have a
bigger agenda for you
than you know about.
That's why you'll meet
people who will say to you,
cancer is the best thing
that ever happened to me.
Changed my life.
I just had a friend
call me today.
She said she broke
her arm skiing.
Three months ago, she tore
a rotator cuff skiing.
I know her history.
I said to her, congratulations.
You finally gave yourself the
brake you've been needing.
It's so interesting
that people think, well,
I've made it this
far on crappy food.
I don't have that
much time left.
But what people don't realize
is that our DNA knows good food,
because it hasn't changed
since we were in the Stone Age.
And you can make a huge
change in your life,
and in your appearance, and
in your health in two weeks.
It happens really quickly.
And I wish people could
understand the degree
to which their life can change.
I sat with Michio Kushi in
Boston for a number of months
when he did macrobiotic
consultations
with people who had cancer and
all kinds of heart disease.
And they'd already been through
the whole medical system.
They had been-- they had
failed the medical system.
The doctor said there's
nothing more we can do.
So then they'd
show up on the door
of a guy who prescribed food.
And then I'd see
their medical chart.
But most importantly,
a month later
they'd come back, looking
like different people.
Their facial
structures had changed.
Everything had changed just
from adopting a healthy diet.
Now, the only ones
who stuck with it
were the ones who had nailed
in the self-love part.
Nevertheless, within
a very short time,
you can affect a huge change.
Let's start with just
eating breakfast.
Kathleen Desmaisons, who
wrote "Potatoes not Prozac,"
had a thing that she did with
recidivism-- drunk drivers
in New Mexico.
And the state sent
her these people
that just kept driving drunk,
because of the connection
between sugar, alcohol, and
feeling better in your brain.
She'd just have
them eat breakfast.
Even if breakfast
was a bag of chips,
it was better than nothing
to nail in their blood sugar.
So let's just say
you eat breakfast.
Or that's what you
do for one week.
Four days during that week,
eat something for breakfast.
Maybe a piece of
whole grain toast.
Maybe a piece of cheese.
Maybe a boiled egg.
Oatmeal is good.
I'd make-- the real stuff
takes no time, really.
All right.
You do that.
Or-- give you another choice.
You take a walk--
15 minutes three times a week.
You start somewhere, anywhere,
because here's what happens.
We like to think that--
we know that bad
habits and addictions
get worse and worse and worse.
What we have failed
to realize is
how one positive change
attracts another positive change
and another.
There was an interesting
study in "The New England
Journal of Medicine" that
followed the impact of one
person quitting smoking.
And they found that
the impact of that
went to four degrees
of separation
from them because of the way
people relate to each other.
So one person in a
workplace stopped smoking.
Next thing you know, we
begin an epidemic of health,
because other people stop
and other people stop.
Or one person has an egg
instead of a donut at breakfast.
Everyone else
looks because we're
herd creatures-- looks and
goes, oh, he's having the egg.
Maybe I'll have the egg.
And before long,
everyone's having the egg.
Because there is
a level at which
we are all one with humanity.
And it gets-- the more people
do this, the easier it becomes.
I spent some time
at Sanoviv, which
is a holistic hospital
in Rosarito, Mexico.
And everyone wears these green
cotton, really ugly sweats.
And everyone eats
the green juice,
and all the rest of the
stuff, and raw vegetables.
It's easy.
Why?
We're all doing it all together.
Everyone has the shots of
wheat grass in the morning.
Everyone has their
alkalinizing--
that's another thing
you can do, by the way--
an alkalinizing drink
in the morning--
lemon juice in hot
water, cayenne pepper.
Have that first thing
in the morning--
that alone.
Just do that for a month.
And that will
alkalinize your blood,
and make you feel
better, and so on.
But when everyone's doing it,
it gets easier and easier.
So I would recommend
for almost everybody,
get a buddy to do
this with you, someone
who will hold your
toes to the fire
when you want to revert back.
Because it takes approximately
30 days to nail in a new habit.
With the way nerves grow and
the central nervous system
is set up, is it takes a
while to make a new habit.
And you need support
during that time.
It's like learning a language.
You say it, you say it, say it.
And then one day, you're
dreaming in the language,
but it takes will.
It takes commitment.
It takes discipline.
I don't want to belittle this.
Anyone who ever quit smoking,
anyone who ever got off
of sugar, there
comes a hard place
where you need support,
one of the reasons
why I'm a huge fan of
the 12-step program.
Addiction is God's
answer to community.
And the 12-step program
works all over the world
and it's free.
And what's the first step?
We admitted we were powerless
over whatever it is--
alcohol, drugs, your
mother-in-law, whatever.
Number 2-- came to believe a
power greater than ourselves
could restore us to sanity.
3-- turned our lives
over to that power.
I believe that power comes
through us as our soul.
Or as they say in
"Eat, Pray, Love,"
God comes through us as us.
What a revelation.
Back in my macrobiotic
days, Michio Kushi
used to say to be
present in the here
and now, one must eat what
is grown in the here and now.
And there's nothing
like a Brandywine tomato
grown in your own backyard and
picked at the peak of ripeness.
This is gourmet food.
That's what it is.
The stuff that is grown right
then and eaten right then.
First of all, it is very,
very high in nutrients.
The nutrient amount starts to
decline the moment it's picked.
But the life energy--
and by the way, Gary
Schwartz down in Tucson
has actually shown
the life energy
that fruits and
vegetables emit as light.
You can see it.
You can document it in the lab.
The light is much greater.
The chi, the life force,
the energy of that tomato
is perfection when
it's just been picked.
So food tastes better that way.
It's higher in nutrient value.
There is no fossil fuels that
are consumed or very little.
OK, if you drive the truck
from the local organic farm
five miles to the
farmer's market,
that's very different
from cultivating
acres and acres of
organic food in China,
and then shipping it
all over the world,
and making it in China
because the labor is cheap.
Also, there is the
food security issue.
What if here in Maine the
main highway into the state,
route 95, suddenly
became impassable?
What would happen to our food?
I was just at the airport to
go to Florida, and we sat down.
I was very excited because we
got to the airport restaurant
in time for breakfast.
Normally, it's closed for
breakfast when we get there.
Guy comes over to the table
and says, I have to tell you,
we have no eggs.
What?
You have no eggs?
The truck didn't come.
So that means that this
restaurant had no eggs.
Now, if something happened to
the transportation system--
a terrorist attack or
anything, suddenly, you
wouldn't have food.
People would starve.
On the other hand, if you've
got people keeping chickens
in their backyard, or you're
supporting local organic farms,
and arable land around
your population centers
is being used to
produce food, or food
is produced on the roofs of
buildings in New York City,
you have food security,
but it tastes better.
And it has higher
nutrient levels.
It's a completely
win-win situation.
And also what you
would do is you
would create jobs and
a food infrastructure
for every area of the country
having its own indigenous food
supply.
That would be so much
better on every level
for the planet itself and
human beings in particular.
So that's really
where we have to go.
Because it's ideal
for everyone involved.
There's no downside except for
these huge agri-business food
suppliers that want to sell
cheap, high-glycemic food
all over the planet.
Now, there's probably
a place for that,
so that people don't starve.
And I'm talking about an ideal,
a vision to which we're all
going--
what we're all going toward.
But in Maine where we have
a very short growing season,
if we can do as well as
we've been doing here,
there's no excuse
for anyone else.
It's an interesting thing.
We think about vanity.
You want to look good.
But the truth is that we
are programmed as a species
to be attracted to the
people who look good.
Why?
Because they're the
healthiest ones.
As Jorge Cruise points
out, the hourglass figure
with the small waist
and so on-- this
is what men are
naturally attracted to.
That's a healthier person
to have babies with.
So let's take vanity.
It's a very good entry way.
Because your skin looks better
when you're eating a diet
that is low glycemic where
the blood sugar is stable.
As a matter of fact, that's
one of the first things
that happens.
Your skin, your hair, your
nails begin to look better.
One of the reasons
that I personally
stopped eating so many grains
and high-glycemic foods
is over the years, I
noticed a couple things.
First of all, there was weight
gain every year, a little more.
And every year, harder
and harder to keep off.
Second, me and my
patients all started
to have fingernails that
broke, hair that broke,
and skin that was getting all
red, and broken blood vessels,
and all of that stuff.
When you eat well,
that goes away.
My daughter was
on a sea semester.
So she's out at sea for--
I don't know-- two
months on the ship.
And she ate no sugar on
purpose, and was exercising,
and in the fresh air.
So never had to worry
about her weight.
Hair and nails looked better
than ever in her entire life.
And it was all because she was
in a controlled environment
called a sailing vessel.
And there was nowhere
to go except for health.
And she avoided all the
cookies that the cook made.
So let me just say from the
point of view of looking good.
Nothing looks better
than health and fitness.
Nothing.
We hear a lot these
days of-- there's
a thing in my profession
called anti-aging medicine.
And I have a good friend
who is a doctor, who's 90.
And she gets up on a podium.
And she goes,
anti-aging medicine.
What are you going to do?
I'm 90.
In other words, we
begin to age the minute
we come out of the womb.
But the question is,
how are we going to age?
If we look at the baby boom
generation, the largest
and richest demographic
on the planet right now,
you see that it splits
into two groups--
those who are getting fatter and
more and more chronically ill
and those who are doing
better than they've ever done.
And you can begin to see the
effects of lifestyle writ
large at about the age of 50.
That's when you come to a
crossroads-- grow or die.
And the choice is yours.
Nobody is going to stay well and
be happy and healthy if they're
not fit, if they're
not physically active.
If you want to be around and
walking at the age of 80,
you've got to get moving.
Because the muscles, and
joints, and all of that,
and the fascia, which is a tight
sweater-like connective tissue
encasement of the whole
body is actually a crystal.
It's a crystalline matrix.
And it's a electromagnetic
field where
something that
happens in your foot
goes right up to the
top of your head.
And what happens with life,
life tends to wear you down.
And people get like this, this
tighter, tighter, tighter,
shorter, shorter, shorter.
And all of that is
completely optional
once you learn that you must
use this body throughout life.
And if you study those-- what
are called Blue Zones where
people live a long time,
they're all active.
But the other thing
they do is they
don't assume that,
OK, now that I'm 50,
I won't be able to
do thus and such.
Or they don't talk
themselves into it.
I'm astounded by the
differences in people.
Let's say that we take a
group of people who are 60.
Some are 60 going on 35.
And some are 60 going on 90.
But understand that
your chronological age
and your biologic age can
be completely different.
Starting at about the age of
30, you see this sort out.
A tremendous amount has to
do with the way you think.
So studies have been
done, particularly one
by Becca Levy who was at Yale at
the time, who found that people
who believed that getting older
was associated with getting
more astute with positive
aspects of aging,
more astute, useful,
wise, and so on.
People who believed
this, who had
positive beliefs about
aging added seven years
to their lives.
They controlled for weight,
blood pressure, meds, smoking,
alcohol, obesity, exercise.
They controlled for all of that.
The belief itself added
seven years to their life.
Now, imagine if you
have the belief,
but then you also stay
physically active.
So my mother went to
Everest Base Camp last May--
age 84.
We think she's the
oldest person--
woman to ever make it
to Everest Base Camp.
I personally never want
to do a trek like that.
Because it looked
so grueling that--
but she had a dream of trekking
in Nepal her whole life.
So for her, it was
the fulfillment
of a lifelong dream.
In her 60s, she did the
entire Appalachian Trail.
In her 70s, she climbed
all of the hundred highest
peaks in New England.
This is her idea of pleasure.
And she was following a dream.
We all have these dreams.
But the dream has to
involve moving your body.
And we even have studies
in the very, very old--
done by a guy named
Bill Evans, where
they went into nursing
homes and took 92-year-olds
and had them develop their
quads and all of that.
And he found that
they learned how
to get up, go to the
bathroom by themselves.
They really did add strength
and relatively quickly.
Do you know who they
had the problem with?
The staff.
Because the staff
believed, we're
here to help these
decrepit, old people.
And they enabled them to
stay decrepit and old.
So let me just say this.
If you have aging parents
and you're watching this,
don't allow them to get into
that old, decrepit mindset,
because you enable them.
It's like people who say
to their mother, mom,
you can't do that alone.
You shouldn't drive
into the city alone.
You're 65.
My mother just got into her
camper, which is 35 feet long,
to go out to Arizona.
She's 85.
She's going with her
best friend who's 87.
They're really good together.
One does the navigating, and
the other does the driving.
My mother can back that thing
up as well as she ever did.
Why?
Because she kept
using those faculties.
And we know this.
The hippocampus of the brain,
which is the memory center,
keeps adding cells
your entire life.
We have had very faulty
research on aging.
And we're finding that
there's this thing called
neuroplasticity,
which is that you
continue to add brain cells.
You continue to mold your brain.
You continue to
add new connections
for your entire life.
So you want to learn to
play a musical instrument?
Fine.
Start.
I don't care if you're 80.
You want to learn how to dance?
Start.
I don't care if you're 80.
Just begin it.
Because the body is
capable of far more than
you ever believed.
I remember listening to
Deepak Chopra years ago.
And he said, we would never get
old, decrepit, and all of that,
except that we watch
other people doing it.
And because we're
herd creatures,
we think that's what
we should be doing.
In families, check
out the people
who are the black
sheep of the family.
They never get the same diseases
as the rest of the family.
And you ask if--
so I had a patient who
said, well, my sister
had a hysterectomy.
We all have hysterectomies.
By the age of 50, that's "what
we do," except for Susan.
She's the black sheep.
She's not like us.
That's funny.
Susan has the same
DNA, same family.
Just decided she was
going to be the crab
that got out of the bucket.
That's what you need to do.
Be the crab that gets
out of the bucket
and does something different.
And then you'll find
that you have the ability
to reinvent yourself.
By the way, every
cell in the body
is replaced every seven years.
And the only reason why we
keep getting the same thing
is we're thinking
the same thoughts
and doing the same behaviors.
But you're never
older than seven.
And it's never too late.
And you can always
reinvent yourself.
And one more thing.
There are documented cases
of spontaneous remission
from every known disease.
So there's no such
thing as false hope.
There is only false "no hope."
There's always hope.
And that's biology.
Thyroid disease.
So many women have some
kind of thyroid problem.
And I want to address
this holistically.
First of all, over the
last 30 years or so,
they have replaced iodides in
bread-making with bromides.
Bromides are a halogen.
Chlorine in the water
is a halogen. Fluoride in
the water is a halogen.
And all of these
halogens-- if you
look at the periodic table
of elements in chemistry,
you will see that iodine,
which is absolutely necessary
for full thyroid function, and
by the way, for breast health
and for ovarian health,
that these halogens actually
displace the iodine
from the cells.
So we have in many places
in the world a deficiency
or at least a sub-optimal
level of iodine in the diet
and in the body.
And by the way, I'd like
to make the distinction
between gross deficiency
disease, which
in iodine would be a goiter.
This is big thyroid
tumor and constant breast
pain, which would be because of
sub-optimal levels of iodine.
By the way, breast tissue
actively sequesters iodine.
And one of the ways
for anyone listening
who has that "misnomer
fibrocystic breast disease,"
start taking kelp tablets.
You'll get rid of it.
So iodine is very,
very important
for the health of the thyroid
and the health of breasts.
And it's the first thing
I would give to a woman
who's been diagnosed
with thyroid problems
or who thinks that she might
have a thyroid problem.
Now, here's what happens.
When women begin to first
take increased iodine,
all those toxic halogens
come up out of their cells.
They get a skin rash, usually.
And what do they say?
I'm "allergic to iodine."
That's not it.
They're detoxing their body.
And so that often happens.
The other thing is when you do
thyroid function test, the TSH,
thyroid-stimulating hormone--
needs to be less than 3.
And in many of the labs, the
indices for thyroid for TSH
are too high.
So the woman will actually have
sub-clinical hypothyroidism.
And if you really know that
it needs to be less than 3,
then you're going to
start treating it.
But the way to treat
it is not necessarily
with synthetic thyroid.
Start treating it holistically.
And then one more thing.
There is the iodide thing.
But then there's-- what is this?
It's the fifth chakra.
It's your voice.
It's having your say.
For 5,000 years,
the feminine voice
has been actively squelched.
There's a wonderful quote
from physicist John Wheeler
that I love.
And it's this.
"Masculinity expresses
the idea that there
are things worth dying for.
Femininity expresses
the idea that there
are things worth living for."
And what's happening
now on planet
Earth is the feminine energy
in men and women is rising.
How many wars can we fight?
How many people who don't
agree with us can we kill?
We realized through the
internet, which is probably
what changed Egyptian
politics, was
Facebook, that we are in
fact one small planet.
And we can't be killing off
everything that we don't want.
So the feminine
values are rising up.
And what do women do?
Women are the ones
typically who do
the birthday parties,
the celebrations,
making things pretty,
putting the little note
in the lunchbox, things
worth living for.
Dancing, pleasure, love,
color, wanting to look good
on your skin and your hair.
Nothing wrong with
the feminine values.
But when you have
said as a woman--
for most have written human
history what you thought--
it didn't go over too well.
And so many women have squelched
their own voice for fear
that they would be
killed, or for fear
that they would be shunned,
or that they would be alone.
That if I have my say and I
really say what I'm thinking,
I'll be alone.
And because we need each
other and because we're
a tribe culture and
a tribe species,
we don't want to risk that.
So we have squelched
what we want to say.
What are canker sores?
Aphthous ulcers.
They're things that you
don't feel you can say.
It's an autoimmune disease.
It's where your mouth tissue
and the mucosal membrane
actually eats your
own mucosal membrane.
Fifth chakra-- having
your say, and knowing when
to say it, how loud to say it.
So it's timing issues as well.
How many people
always run around?
I don't have enough time.
I'm running out of time.
It affects the thyroid,
that sense of timing.
So you need to change
your relationship to time,
take kelp tablets, have your
say when it is appropriate
and in a loving way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]